This document describes the tasks for renaming and relocating the integration test classes so that they are physically separate from the unit tests.  The tasks are as follows:

1. Relocation: The tests are currently located in src/test/java/com/ospreydcs/dp/service/integration.  We want to move that "integration" directory from there to src/test/integration/java.  This will allow the default configurations for Maven surefire and failsafe plugins to work correctly for unit and integration tests, respectively.  After relocating, we will have directories like src/test/integration/java/[ingest, query, annotation, ingestionstream].
2. Renaming: The integration test classes contained below the "integration" directory (src/test/integration/java) use the naming convention *Test.java.  We want to change those files to use the convention *IT.java.  E.g., instead of "ExportDataTest.java" we will have "ExportDataIT.java".  This convention is industry standard and aligns with the Maven Failsafe plugin to identify integration tests.  Note that the "integration" directory contains other class files that are not test classes like "GrpcIntegrationAnnotationServiceWrapper" and "AnnotationIntegrationTestIntermediate".  These should not be renamed since they are not test classes.
3. Tagging: We want to tag each of the integration test classes with the annotation "@Tag("integration")".  This will allow us to use the tags to include/exclude tagged tests by using "-DexcludeTags=integration" and "-DincludeTags=integration".  Please add this annotation to all the *IT.java integration test class files (once the test classes have been renamed).